Preface
This book is an outgrowth of notes compiled by the author while teachingcourses for undergraduate and masters/MBA ﬁnance students at Washing-ton University in St. Louis and the Institut f¨ ur H¨ohere Studien in Vienna. At one time, a course in Options and Futures was considered an advanced ﬁnanceelective, but now such a course is nearly mandatory for any ﬁnance major andis an elective chosen by many non-ﬁnance majors as well. Moreover, studentsare exposed to derivative securities in courses on Investments, InternationalFinance, Risk Management, Investment Banking, Fixed Income, etc. This ex-pansion of education in derivative securities mirrors the increased importanceof derivative securities in corporate ﬁnance and investment management.MBA and undergraduate courses typically (and appropriately) focus onthe use of derivatives for hedging and speculating. This is suﬃcient for manystudents. However, the seller of derivatives, in addition to needing to under-stand buy-side demands, is confronted with the need to price and hedge. More-over, the buyer of derivatives, depending on the degree of competition betweensellers, may very likely beneﬁt from some knowledge of pricing as well. It is“pricing and hedging” that is the primary focus of this book. Through learn-ing the fundamentals of pricing and hedging, students also acquire a deeperunderstanding of the contracts themselves. Hopefully, this book will also beof use to practitioners and for students in Masters of Financial Engineeringprograms and, to some extent, Ph.D. students in ﬁnance.The book is concerned with pricing and hedging derivatives in frictionlessmarkets. By “frictionless,” I mean that the book ignores transaction costs(commissions, bid-ask spreads and the price impacts of trades), margin (col-lateral) requirements and any restrictions on short selling. The theory of pric-ing and hedging in frictionless markets stems of course from the work of Blackand Scholes [6] and Merton [51] and is a very well developed theory. It is basedon the assumption that there are no arbitrage opportunities in the market.The theory is the foundation for pricing and hedging in markets with fric-tions (i.e., in real markets!) but practice can diﬀer from theory in importantways if the frictions are signiﬁcant. For example, an arbitrage opportunity in
VIII Preface
a frictionless market often will not be an arbitrage opportunity for a traderwho moves the market when he trades, faces collateral requirements, etc. Thisbook has nothing to say about how one should deviate from the benchmarkfrictionless theory when frictions are important. Another important omissionfrom the book is jump processes—the book deals exclusively with binomialand Brownian motion models.The book is intended primarily to be used for advanced courses in deriv-ative securities. It is self-contained, and the ﬁrst chapter presents the basicﬁnancial concepts. However, much material (functioning of security exchanges,payoﬀ diagrams, spread strategies, etc.) that is standard in an introductorybook has not been included here. On the other hand, though it is not an in-troductory book, it is not truly an advanced book on derivatives either. Onany of the topics covered in the book, there are more advanced treatmentsavailable in book form already. However, the books that I have seen (and thereare indeed many) are either too narrow in focus for the courses I taught ornot easily accessible to the students I taught or (most commonly) both. If thisbook is successful, it will be as a bridge between an introductory course inOptions and Futures and the more advanced literature. Towards that end, Ihave included cites to more advanced books in appropriate places throughout.The book includes an introduction to computational methods, and theterm “introduction” is meant quite seriously here. The book was developedfor students with no prior experience in programming or numerical analysis,and it only covers the most basic ideas. Nevertheless, I believe that this is anextremely important feature of the book. It is my experience that the theorybecomes much more accessible to students when they learn to code a for-mula or to simulate a process. The book builds up to binomial, Monte Carlo,and ﬁnite-diﬀerence methods by ﬁrst developing simple programs for simplecomputations. These serve two roles: they introduce the student to program-ming, and they result in tools that enable students to solve real problems,allowing the inclusion of exercises of a practical rather than purely theoreticalnature. I have used the book for semester-length courses emphasizing calcu-lation (most of the exercises are of that form) and for short courses coveringonly the theory.Nearly all of the formulas and procedures described in the book are bothderived from ﬁrst principles and implemented in Excel VBA. The VBA pro-grams are in the text and in an Excel workbook that can be downloaded freeof charge atwww.kerryback.net. I use a few special features of Excel, inparticular the cumulative normal distribution function and the random num-ber generator. Otherwise, the programs can easily be translated into any otherlanguage. In particular, it is easy to translate them into MATLAB, which alsoincludes a random number generator and the cumulative normal distributionfunction (or, rather, the closely related “error function”) as part of its basicimplementation. I chose VBA because students (ﬁnance students, at least)can be expected to already have it on their computers and because Excel isa good environment for many exercises, such as analyzing hedges, that do
Preface IX
not require programming. An appendix provides the necessary introductionto VBA programming.Viewed as a math book, this is a book in applied math, not math proper.My goal is to get students as quickly as possible to the point where they cancompute things. Many mathematical issues (ﬁltrations, completion of ﬁltra-tions, formal deﬁnitions of expectations and conditional expectations, etc.) areentirely ignored. It would not be unfair to call this a “cookbook” approach. Itry to explain intuitively why the recipes work but do not give proofs or evenformal statements of the facts that underlie them.I have naturally taken pains to present the theory in what I think is thesimplest possible manner. The book uses almost exclusively the probabilis-tic/martingale approach, both because it is my preference and because itseems easier than partial diﬀerential equations for students in business andthe social sciences to grasp. A sampling of some of the more or less distinctivecharacteristics of the book, in terms of exposition, is:•Important theoretical results are highlighted in boxes for easy reference;the derivations that are less important and more technical are presentedin smaller type and relegated to the ends of sections.•Changes of numeraire are introduced in the ﬁrst chapter in a one-periodbinomial model, the probability measure corresponding to the underlyingas numeraire being given as much emphasis as the risk-neutral measure.•The fundamental result for pricing (asset prices are martingales underchanges of numeraire) is presented in the ﬁrst chapter, because it does notneed the machinery of stochastic calculus.•The basic ideas in pricing digital and share digitals, and hence in derivingthe Black-Scholes formula, are also presented in the ﬁrst chapter. Digitalsand share digitals are priced in Chap. 3 before calls and puts.•Brownian motion is introduced by simulating it in discrete time. Thequadratic variation property is emphasized, including exercises that con-trast Brownian motion with continuously diﬀerentiable functions of time,in order to motivate Itˆ o’s formula.•The distribution of the underlying under diﬀerent numeraires is deriveddirectly from the fundamental pricing result and Itˆ o’s formula, bypassing Girsanov’s theorem (which is of course also a consequence of Itˆ o’s formula). •Substantial emphasis is placed on forwards, synthetic forwards, optionson forwards and hedging with forwards because these have many applica-tions in ﬁxed income and elsewhere—a simple but characteristic exampleis valuing a European option on a stock paying a known cash dividend asa European option on the synthetic forward with the same maturity.•Following Margrabe [50] (who attributes the idea to S. Ross) the for-mula for exchange options is derived by a change of numeraire from theBlack-Scholes formula. Very simple arguments derive Black’s formula forforward and futures options from Margrabe’s formula and Merton’s for-mula for stock options in the absence of a constant risk-free rate from
XP r e f a c e
Black’s formula. This demonstrates the equivalence of these importantoption pricing formulas as follows:Black-Scholes =⇒Margrabe=⇒Black=⇒Merton=⇒Black-Scholes •Quanto forwards and options are priced by ﬁrst ﬁnding the portfolio thatreplicates the value of a foreign security translated at a ﬁxed exchangerate and then viewing quanto forwards and options as standard forwardsand options on the replicating portfolio.•The market model is presented as an introduction to the pricing of ﬁxed-income derivatives. Forward rates are shown to be martingales under theforward measure by virtue of their being forward prices of portfolios thatpay spot rates.•In order to illustrate how term structure models are used to price ﬁxed-income derivatives, the Vasicek/Hull-White model is worked out in greatdetail. Other important term structure models are discussed much morebrieﬂy.Of course, none of these items is original, but in conjunction with the compu-tational tools, I believe they make the “rocket science” of derivative securitiesaccessible to a broader group of students.The book is divided into three parts, labeled “Introduction to Option Pric-ing,” “Advanced Option Pricing,” and “Fixed Income.” Naturally, many ofthe chapters build upon one another, but it is possible to read Chaps. 1–3,Sects. 7.1–7.2 (the Margrabe and Black formulas) and then Part III on ﬁxedincome. For a more complete coverage, but still omitting two of the more dif-ﬁcult chapters, one could read all of Parts I and II except Chaps. 8 and 10,pausing in Chap. 8 to read the deﬁnitions of baskets, spreads, barriers, look-backs and Asians and in Chap. 10 to read the discussion of the fundamentalpartial diﬀerential equation.I would like to thank Mark Broadie, the series editor, for helpful comments,and especially I want to thank my wife, Diana, without whose encouragementand support I could not have written this. She mowed the lawn—and managedeverything else—while I typed, and that is a great gift.College Station, Texas Kerry Back April, 2005
